---
title: "Perceptions about e-cigarette safety may lead to e-smoking during pregnancy"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2014-09-Ecigs
excerpt: 'We suggest that perceptions regarding e-cigarettes safety may lead to nictoine exposure during pregnancy.'
date: Sept 2014
venue: 'Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic'
paperurl: 'http://selinabaeza.github.io/files/Baeza Loya et al 2014 .pdf'
citation: 'Baeza-Loya, S. et al (2014). &quot;Perceptions about e-cigarette safety may lead to e-smoking during pregnancy.&quot; <i>Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic 1</i>. 78.3 (2014): 243-252.'
---
Abstract:

Electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes) are nicotine-delivery devices that are increasingly used, especially by young people. Because e-cigarettes lack many of the substances found in regular tobacco, they are often perceived as a safer smoking alternative, especially in high-risk situations such as pregnancy. However, studies suggest that it is exposure to nicotine that is most detrimental to prenatal development. The authors studied perceptions of tobacco and e-cigarette health risks using a multiple-choice survey. To study the perceived safety of e-cigarettes versus tobacco cigarettes, 184 modified Global Health Youth Surveys (WHO, http://www.who.int/tobacco/surveillance/gyts/en/) were completed electronically or on paper. Age range, smoking status, and perceptions about tobacco cigarettes and e-cigarettes were studied. The results verified that younger people use e-cigarettes more than older people. Tobacco cigarettes were perceived as more harmful than e-cigarettes to health in general, including lung cancer and pregnancy. Although more research is necessary, the authors postulate that the perception that e-cigarettes are safer during pregnancy may induce pregnant women to use these devices more freely. Given that nicotine is known to cause fetal harm, pregnant mothers who smoke e-cigarettes could cause even greater harm to the fetus because e-cigarettes are perceived as being safer than tobacco cigarettes. Until more data about the effects of nicotine during pregnancy are available, the authors advocate for labeling of e-cigarettes as potentially harmful, at least during pregnancy.

[Download paper here](http://selinabaeza.github.io/files/Baeza Loya et al 2014 .pdf

Recommended citation: Baeza-Loya, Selina, et al. "Perceptions about e-cigarette safety may lead to e-smoking during pregnancy." Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic 78.3 (2014): 243-252.
